




Network Working Group                                         T. Farley
Internet-Draft                                            Veritas Acta
Intended status: Informational                             6 April 2026
Expires: 8 October 2026


             Knowledge Units for Multi-Model Deliberation
               draft-farley-acta-knowledge-units-00

Abstract

   This document defines the Knowledge Unit (KU) format for
   representing verified knowledge produced through structured
   multi-model deliberation.  A Knowledge Unit captures the question
   asked, the models that participated, the consensus achieved, the
   points of agreement and disagreement, and the cryptographic
   receipts that bind each deliberation round to an independently
   verifiable chain.

   The format addresses the epistemic integrity gap in LLM-maintained
   knowledge bases: how to prove that knowledge was derived through a
   rigorous process, that disagreement was preserved rather than
   smoothed away, and that the record has not been tampered with.

   This specification complements draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts,
   which defines the receipt format and verification protocol used to
   sign individual deliberation rounds.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current
   Internet-Drafts is at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Knowledge Unit Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Core Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Consensus Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Provenance Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.4.  Source Provenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.5.  Lifecycle Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.6.  Receipt Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.7.  Inter-KU Relations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Deliberation Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.1.  Round 1: Independent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.2.  Round 2: Adversarial Critique . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.3.  Round 3: Synthesis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Consensus Levels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Canonical Question Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  Lifecycle Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     7.1.  States  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     7.2.  Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   8.  Receipt Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   9.  Progressive Disclosure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10. Alternative Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   13. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     13.1. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     13.2. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20


1.  Introduction

   Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used to produce,
   curate, and maintain knowledge bases.  The "LLM Wiki" pattern,
   in which an LLM incrementally compiles and maintains a structured
   collection of interlinked documents from raw sources, has gained
   significant adoption.  Multiple independent implementations have
   appeared across personal research, team knowledge management,
   and agent memory systems.

   While effective for content maintenance, single-model knowledge
   bases lack three properties critical for shared knowledge:

   1.  Multi-perspective verification: A single model's output
       reflects its training data biases and architectural
       limitations.  Multiple models with different training corpora
       and architectures provide independent perspectives that
       surface blind spots no single model can detect.

   2.  Structured disagreement: When models disagree, the
       disagreement itself is informative.  Current approaches
       either smooth away disagreement through editorial synthesis
       or fail to capture it structurally.  Readers see false
       certainty rather than the actual state of knowledge.

   3.  Cryptographic provenance: Mutable logs and git histories can
       be rewritten.  Content hashes prove freshness but not
       authenticity.  Tamper-evident provenance requires
       cryptographic signatures bound to each deliberation step,
       independently verifiable by any party without trusting the
       knowledge base operator.

   This document defines the Knowledge Unit (KU) format to address
   these gaps.  A KU is the output of a structured multi-model
   deliberation process in which:

   -  Multiple frontier models independently answer a question
      (Round 1)
   -  Models critique each other's responses in assigned adversarial
      roles (Round 2)
   -  A synthesis engine extracts agreement and disagreement
      (Round 3)
   -  Every round response is Ed25519-signed per
      [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts]

   The result is a self-contained knowledge artifact that records
   WHAT is known, HOW it was determined, WHERE models agree and
   disagree, and provides CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROOF of the entire process.

   A Knowledge Unit is not a replacement for single-model wikis.
   It is the artifact produced when a question is important enough
   to warrant multi-model deliberation with cryptographic proof.
   Many wiki entries do not need this level of rigour.  KUs are
   for the entries that do.


2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
   described in BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when,
   they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

   KU:  Knowledge Unit.  The atomic unit of verified knowledge
      produced through multi-model deliberation.

   Deliberation:  A structured multi-round process in which multiple
      models produce, critique, and synthesise responses to a
      question.

   Receipt:  An Ed25519-signed artifact attesting to a specific
      deliberation round, as defined in
      [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts].

   Consensus Level:  A structural classification of agreement among
      participating models, determined mechanically from the
      deliberation output.

   Roster:  The set of models participating in a deliberation,
      along with their versions and identifiers.

   Source:  An input document, article, dataset, or other artifact
      that provides context for the deliberation.  Sources are
      immutable once ingested.

   Volatility:  The expected rate of change for the knowledge domain
      a KU covers, which informs freshness intervals.


3.  Knowledge Unit Schema

   A Knowledge Unit MUST be represented as a JSON object conforming
   to the schema defined in this section.  Implementations MUST
   support JSON serialisation.  Implementations MAY support
   additional serialisation formats (e.g., CBOR, YAML frontmatter).
   See Section 10 for alternative serialisation guidance.

3.1.  Core Fields

   id (string, REQUIRED):  Unique identifier for this Knowledge
      Unit.  The format MUST be "ku-" followed by a 12-character
      alphanumeric string (e.g., "ku-z36vuoreb2k3").  The identifier
      MUST be immutable once assigned.  Implementations MUST NOT
      reuse identifiers.

   version (integer, REQUIRED):  Schema version number.  The
      current version is 1.  Implementations MUST reject KUs with
      unrecognised version numbers.

   canonical_question (string, REQUIRED):  The definitive question
      this KU answers.  See Section 6 for canonicalization rules.
      This field MUST NOT be empty.

   domain (string, OPTIONAL):  Topic classification.  Recommended
      values include "technology", "science", "health", "policy",
      "economics", "agent_security", "agent_governance",
      "research", "engineering".  Implementations SHOULD use
      values from this list where applicable but MAY define
      additional domain values.

   tags (array of strings, OPTIONAL):  Additional classification
      labels for cross-domain discovery.  Implementations SHOULD
      use lowercase, hyphen-separated values (e.g.,
      "machine-learning", "climate-policy").

3.2.  Consensus Fields

   consensus_level (string, REQUIRED):  The level of agreement
      among participating models.  MUST be one of: "unanimous",
      "strong", "split", "divergent".  See Section 5 for
      definitions.

   agreed (array, REQUIRED):  Points where all participating models
      converge.  Each element MUST be either:

      -  A string containing a claim text, or
      -  An object with the following fields:
         *  claim (string, REQUIRED): The agreed claim.
         *  confidence (string, OPTIONAL): Qualitative confidence
            level ("high", "medium", "low").
         *  evidence (string, OPTIONAL): Supporting reference or
            reasoning.
         *  source_refs (array of strings, OPTIONAL): References
            to source identifiers from the sources array (see
            Section 3.4) that support this claim.

      The array MUST NOT be empty for KUs with consensus_level
      "unanimous" or "strong".

   disputed (array, OPTIONAL):  Points where models diverge.  Each
      element MUST be an object with the following fields:

      -  claim (string, REQUIRED):  The disputed point.
      -  positions (object, REQUIRED):  A map from model identifier
         to that model's position on the claim.  Each key MUST be
         a model identifier from models_used.
      -  significance (string, OPTIONAL):  Whether this dispute is
         "core" (affects the main conclusion), "framing" (different
         emphasis), or "edge_case" (different conclusions on
         boundary conditions).

   uncertain (array, OPTIONAL):  Points that no model could
      resolve with confidence.  Each element MUST be either a
      string or an object with:

      -  claim (string, REQUIRED):  The uncertain point.
      -  reason (string, OPTIONAL):  Why this remains unresolved
         (e.g., "insufficient evidence", "outside training data",
         "rapidly evolving area").

   synthesis (string, OPTIONAL):  A human-readable summary
      paragraph produced by the synthesis engine (Round 3).

      IMPORTANT:  The synthesis field is NOT part of the canonical
      knowledge record.  It is an editorial convenience produced
      by a single model and may introduce editorial bias.
      Implementations MUST NOT treat the synthesis as
      authoritative.  The authoritative content is the agreed,
      disputed, and uncertain arrays.

3.3.  Provenance Fields

   models_used (array of strings, REQUIRED):  Model identifiers
      used in this deliberation.  Each identifier SHOULD follow a
      provider/model format (e.g., "anthropic/claude-opus-4",
      "openai/gpt-5").

   roster_version (string, OPTIONAL):  ISO 8601 date of the model
      roster snapshot used for this deliberation.

   roster_hash (string, OPTIONAL):  SHA-256 hash of the sorted
      models_used array, encoded as lowercase hexadecimal.  This
      enables efficient roster version comparison.

   process_template (string, REQUIRED):  The deliberation process
      template used.  Default value: "3-round".  Implementations
      MUST document any non-default process templates.

   total_tokens (integer, OPTIONAL):  Total tokens consumed across
      all rounds and models.

   total_cost_cents (number, OPTIONAL):  Total API cost in US
      cents for the deliberation.

3.4.  Source Provenance

   sources (array, OPTIONAL):  Source documents that provided
      context for the deliberation.  Each element MUST be an
      object with:

      -  uri (string, REQUIRED):  The location of the source
         (URL, file path, or DOI).
      -  title (string, OPTIONAL):  Human-readable title.
      -  content_hash (string, REQUIRED):  SHA-256 hash of the
         source content at ingestion time, encoded as lowercase
         hexadecimal with "sha256:" prefix.
      -  ingested_at (string, REQUIRED):  ISO 8601 datetime when
         the source was captured.

      When a source's content changes (its hash no longer matches
      the stored content_hash), any KU derived from that source
      SHOULD be considered potentially stale, regardless of its
      fresh_until value.

   source_url (string, OPTIONAL):  URL of the primary source that
      seeded this deliberation.  Retained for backwards
      compatibility; new implementations SHOULD use the sources
      array.

   source_title (string, OPTIONAL):  Title of the primary source
      document.  Retained for backwards compatibility.

3.5.  Lifecycle Fields

   status (string, REQUIRED):  Current lifecycle state.  MUST be
      one of: "active", "stale", "superseded".  See Section 7.

   fresh_until (string, REQUIRED):  ISO 8601 datetime after which
      this KU SHOULD be considered potentially stale.

      Default freshness intervals by volatility:
      -  "stable":    365 days from published_at
      -  "evolving":  90 days from published_at (the default)
      -  "volatile":  30 days from published_at

   volatility (string, OPTIONAL):  Expected rate of change for
      this knowledge domain.  MUST be one of:

      -  "stable":    Knowledge unlikely to change (e.g.,
         established science, historical facts, protocol
         specifications).
      -  "evolving":  Knowledge changes over months (e.g.,
         best practices, policy recommendations).  This is the
         default if omitted.
      -  "volatile":  Knowledge changes over weeks (e.g.,
         benchmark rankings, pricing, current events).

      Implementations SHOULD use volatility to set appropriate
      fresh_until intervals.

   supersedes (string or null, OPTIONAL):  The id of the KU that
      this KU replaces.  When present, the referenced KU's status
      SHOULD be set to "superseded".

   parent_ku_id (string or null, OPTIONAL):  The id of a parent KU
      from which this KU's question was derived (e.g., a follow-up
      question generated during synthesis).

   published_at (string, OPTIONAL):  ISO 8601 datetime of
      publication.

3.6.  Receipt Fields

   receipt_sig (string, REQUIRED):  The aggregate Ed25519 signature
      over the receipt chain hash, encoded as lowercase
      hexadecimal.  Produced per
      [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts].

   receipt_kid (string, REQUIRED):  Key identifier for the signing
      key.  Enables key rotation.

   receipt_hash (string, REQUIRED):  SHA-256 hash of the chained
      per-round receipt hashes, encoded as lowercase hexadecimal.
      See Section 8 for chain construction.

3.7.  Inter-KU Relations

   relations (array, OPTIONAL):  Typed relations to other Knowledge
      Units.  Each element MUST be an object with:

      -  target_ku_id (string, REQUIRED):  The id of the related
         KU.
      -  relation (string, REQUIRED):  The relation type.  MUST be
         one of:

         *  "supports":  This KU provides evidence that
            strengthens the target KU's conclusions.
         *  "contradicts":  This KU's conclusions conflict with
            the target KU's conclusions.
         *  "refines":  This KU narrows, qualifies, or adds
            precision to the target KU.
         *  "extends":  This KU covers additional dimensions of
            the target KU's topic.
         *  "depends_on":  This KU's conclusions require the
            target KU's claims as premises.

      -  claims (array of strings, OPTIONAL):  Specific claims
         from the target KU that this relation applies to.
         When omitted, the relation applies to the KU as a whole.

   Relations are directional: if KU-A "contradicts" KU-B, it does
   not imply KU-B "contradicts" KU-A (KU-B may not yet be aware of
   KU-A).  Implementations SHOULD maintain bidirectional awareness
   by adding reciprocal relations when discovered.

   Relations, combined with the parent_ku_id and supersedes fields,
   form a knowledge graph.  This graph enables traversal operations
   such as: "find all KUs that contradict this claim" or "find the
   evidence chain supporting this conclusion."


4.  Deliberation Process

   The default deliberation process ("3-round") consists of three
   rounds.  Implementations MAY define additional process templates;
   the process_template field MUST indicate which was used.

4.1.  Round 1: Independent

   Each participating model independently answers the canonical
   question.  Models MUST NOT be shown each other's responses
   during Round 1.  Implementations SHOULD present responses to
   subsequent rounds using blind labels (e.g., "Response A",
   "Response B") to prevent anchoring on perceived model authority.

   Implementations SHOULD include at least one model from a
   different training lineage than the majority (e.g., at least
   one non-US model when the majority are US-trained).  This
   requirement mitigates correlated training data bias.

   Each Round 1 response MUST be signed per
   [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts].

   The response record MUST include:

   -  ku_id:  The identifier of the parent KU.
   -  round:  1
   -  slot:   Numeric slot (1-based) for this model.
   -  model:  Model identifier from models_used.
   -  role:   "independent"
   -  content:  The model's response text.
   -  content_hash:  SHA-256 of the response text.
   -  receipt_sig:   Ed25519 signature.
   -  receipt_kid:   Signing key identifier.

4.2.  Round 2: Adversarial Critique

   Models are presented with all Round 1 responses (using blind
   labels) and assigned critique roles.  Recommended roles include:

   -  verifier:  Checks factual claims and identifies unsupported
      assertions.
   -  devil_advocate:  Argues against the emerging consensus,
      including generating counter-arguments and identifying
      unstated assumptions.
   -  synthesizer:  Identifies common ground and areas of
      divergence.
   -  clarity_editor:  Ensures responses are unambiguous and
      well-structured.

   Implementations SHOULD assign different roles to different
   models.  Role assignment SHOULD NOT be communicated to other
   models.

   At least one model MUST be assigned a role that challenges the
   emerging consensus (devil_advocate or verifier).  This
   requirement ensures that agreement is tested, not assumed.

   Each Round 2 response MUST be signed.

4.3.  Round 3: Synthesis

   A synthesis engine (typically one model) processes all Round 1
   and Round 2 responses to produce structured output:

   -  agreed (array):  Claims where all models converge.
   -  disputed (array):  Claims where models diverge, with
      per-model positions.
   -  uncertain (array):  Claims no model could resolve
      confidently.
   -  consensus_level (string):  Structural classification.
   -  follow_ups (array, OPTIONAL):  Suggested follow-up questions
      for future deliberation.

   The synthesis output MUST be signed.

   IMPORTANT:  The synthesis engine MUST NOT invent claims that
   do not appear in Round 1 or Round 2 responses.  Its role is
   extraction and classification, not generation.


5.  Consensus Levels

   Consensus levels are determined structurally by the synthesis
   engine based on agreement patterns observed in Round 1 and
   Round 2 responses.  Consensus levels MUST NOT be assigned
   editorially.

   unanimous:  All models converge on the same core claims with
      no substantive disagreement.  The disputed array MUST be
      empty.

   strong:  Models agree on the core answer but differ on emphasis,
      framing, or edge cases.  The disputed array MAY contain
      minor points with significance "framing" or "edge_case".

   split:  Models agree on some claims but diverge substantively
      on at least one core claim.  The disputed array MUST contain
      at least one entry with significance "core".

   divergent:  No meaningful common ground exists.  Models reach
      fundamentally different conclusions.  The agreed array MAY be
      empty or contain only trivial observations.

   IMPORTANT:  Consensus among AI models is evidence, not proof.
   Strong consensus means multiple models with different training
   data, architectures, and potential biases independently arrived
   at similar conclusions.  It does not establish truth.  A topic
   on which all current models agree may be overturned by future
   evidence or models.


6.  Canonical Question Resolution

   Different phrasings of the same question SHOULD resolve to the
   same canonical_question.  Canonicalization serves three purposes:

   1.  Deduplication:  Preventing redundant deliberations on the
       same topic.
   2.  Linking:  Enabling hierarchical knowledge structures where a
       general question anchors more specific sub-questions.
   3.  Discovery:  Enabling consumers to find relevant KUs without
       knowing the exact phrasing used.

   The canonicalization model is hierarchical inheritance:

   -  A general question (e.g., "Is the JR Pass worth it?") serves
      as the canonical anchor.
   -  Specific variants inherit from the general question and add
      specialized components:
      *  "Is the JR Pass worth it for families?" (audience variant)
      *  "Is the JR Pass worth it for a solo 7-day trip?"
         (constraint variant)
      *  "Was the JR Pass worth it before the 2024 price increase?"
         (temporal variant)
   -  Each variant MAY produce its own KU with a parent_ku_id
      reference to the general KU.
   -  Implementations SHOULD detect when a new question is a
      variant of an existing canonical question and link them.

   Implementations MUST normalise questions by:

   1.  Converting to lowercase.
   2.  Removing leading/trailing whitespace.
   3.  Removing trailing punctuation (? ! .).
   4.  Reducing consecutive whitespace to a single space.
   5.  Removing filler phrases ("I was wondering", "Can you tell
       me", "What do you think about").

   Implementations SHOULD additionally:

   6.  Apply domain-specific synonym resolution where appropriate
       (e.g., "ML" and "machine learning").
   7.  Normalise named entities to canonical forms (e.g.,
       "GPT4" to "gpt-4").

   Duplicate detection:  Before initiating a new deliberation,
   implementations SHOULD check whether a KU already exists for
   the normalised canonical question.  If an active KU exists,
   the implementation SHOULD return the existing KU rather than
   re-deliberating, unless the KU is stale or the consumer
   explicitly requests fresh deliberation.


7.  Lifecycle Management

7.1.  States

   A KU transitions through the following states:

   active:  The KU was produced within its freshness window and
      has not been superseded.  This is the initial state.

   stale:  The current time exceeds fresh_until, or a source
      document's content_hash no longer matches (see Section 3.4),
      but no replacement KU has been produced.  A stale KU remains
      valid but SHOULD be re-deliberated.

   superseded:  A newer KU with supersedes pointing to this KU has
      been published.  A superseded KU MUST NOT be modified.  Its
      receipts remain independently verifiable.

7.2.  Operations

   The following operations affect KU lifecycle:

   KEEP:  Re-deliberation confirms the same conclusions.  The
      fresh_until field is extended.  Status remains "active".

   UPDATE:  Re-deliberation refines conclusions without
      contradiction.  A new KU is published with supersedes
      pointing to the old KU.

   SUPERSEDE:  Re-deliberation contradicts previous consensus.
      Same mechanical effect as UPDATE but indicates the previous
      conclusions were wrong, not just incomplete.

   MERGE:  Two or more KUs cover overlapping questions.  A new KU
      is produced with all original questions as context.  All
      original KUs become "superseded".

   ARCHIVE:  The question is no longer relevant.  Status set to
      "superseded" with no replacement.

   IMPORTANT:  Published KUs are NEVER modified in place.  All
   changes produce new KUs with supersedes links.  This invariant
   ensures receipts remain valid.  The complete version history is
   traversable through the supersedes chain.


8.  Receipt Binding

   The aggregate receipt for a KU is constructed by chaining
   per-round receipt hashes.  For a standard 3-round deliberation
   with N models:

   Round 1 produces N response receipts: r1_1, r1_2, ..., r1_N
   Round 2 produces N response receipts: r2_1, r2_2, ..., r2_N
   Round 3 produces 1 synthesis receipt: r3_synth

   The receipt_hash is computed as:

     round1_hash = SHA-256(r1_1.sig || r1_2.sig || ... || r1_N.sig)
     round2_hash = SHA-256(r2_1.sig || r2_2.sig || ... || r2_N.sig)
     round3_hash = SHA-256(r3_synth.sig)
     receipt_hash = SHA-256(round1_hash || round2_hash || round3_hash)

   Where || denotes concatenation of the raw signature bytes.

   The receipt_sig is produced by signing receipt_hash with the
   gateway's Ed25519 private key per [RFC8032]:

     receipt_sig = Ed25519-Sign(private_key, receipt_hash)

   Verification:

     Ed25519-Verify(public_key, receipt_hash, receipt_sig)

   The public key MUST be retrievable through at least one of:

   -  The receipt_kid field mapped to a published key directory.
   -  Direct inclusion in the receipt artifact (self-contained
      mode).

   Individual round receipts MAY be verified independently using
   the per-round verification defined in
   [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts].  This enables partial
   verification (e.g., verifying only the Round 1 responses
   without the synthesis).


9.  Progressive Disclosure

   Knowledge Units contain information at multiple levels of
   detail.  To support efficient consumption across different
   contexts (agent queries, search results, full article display),
   implementations SHOULD support progressive disclosure at four
   standard levels:

   L0 - Headline (~50 tokens):
      canonical_question + consensus_level + the first element of
      the agreed array.  Suitable for search result listings and
      index entries.

   L1 - Summary (~200 tokens):
      canonical_question + consensus_level + all agreed claims +
      disputed claim texts (without per-model positions).  Suitable
      for agent context injection and sidebar display.

   L2 - Full (~1,000 tokens):
      All L1 fields + synthesis + per-model positions on disputed
      claims + uncertain array + source references.  Suitable for
      article-level display.

   L3 - Complete (full deliberation):
      All L2 fields + all Round 1, Round 2, and Round 3 response
      texts + individual receipt signatures.  Suitable for audit,
      verification, and detailed analysis.

   The level numbering is inspired by progressive disclosure
   patterns in content delivery.  Implementations SHOULD serve the
   minimum level sufficient for the consumer's needs to conserve
   context tokens.

   An agent querying a KU corpus SHOULD read L0 for all candidates,
   L1 for the top matches, and L2 or L3 only for the KU it selects
   to answer the user's question.


10.  Alternative Serialization

   The canonical representation of a Knowledge Unit is JSON.
   However, many knowledge management tools operate on files with
   YAML frontmatter and markdown bodies (e.g., Obsidian, static
   site generators, agent memory systems).

   Implementations MAY represent a KU as a YAML frontmatter block
   followed by a markdown body.  The mapping is:

   ---
   ku_id: ku-z36vuoreb2k3
   version: 1
   consensus_level: strong
   volatility: evolving
   domain: technology
   tags: [machine-learning, capability-plateau]
   models_used:
     - anthropic/claude-opus-4
     - openai/gpt-5
     - google/gemini-2.5-pro
     - deepseek/deepseek-r2
   agreed:
     - LLMs have not plateaued on reasoning benchmarks
     - Scaling laws continue to hold for compute
     - Data quality matters more than data quantity
   disputed:
     - claim: Whether emergent capabilities are real
       positions:
         anthropic/claude-opus-4: Likely real
         deepseek/deepseek-r2: Measurement artifact
   status: active
   fresh_until: 2026-07-06
   receipt_hash: sha256:7d865e...
   receipt_sig: 3da316...
   receipt_kid: sb:issuer:de073ae64e43
   published_at: 2026-04-06
   ---
   # Are LLMs approaching a capability plateau?

   ## Synthesis
   [markdown body - editorial summary, not canonical]

   ## Sources
   - [Source 1 title](url)
   - [Source 2 title](url)

   When converting between JSON and YAML frontmatter, the agreed
   and disputed arrays MUST preserve their full structure.
   Simplified string-only representations in frontmatter MUST be
   expanded to full objects when converting back to JSON.

   Tools that read KUs from YAML frontmatter MUST treat the
   markdown body as equivalent to the synthesis field (editorial,
   not canonical).


11.  Security Considerations

   Model Collusion:  If all participating models share the same
   bias (e.g., from shared training data), consensus may be
   spurious.  Implementations SHOULD include at least one model
   from a different training lineage (e.g., at least one non-US
   model).  The models_used field enables consumers to evaluate
   roster diversity.

   Synthesis Bias:  The Round 3 synthesis is produced by a single
   model, introducing potential editorial bias.  The synthesis
   field is explicitly NOT canonical (see Section 3.2).  The
   agreed, disputed, and uncertain arrays, which are extracted
   from all models' outputs, are the authoritative content.

   Receipt Replay:  An attacker could present a valid receipt from
   one deliberation alongside different content.  Verifiers MUST
   check that the receipt_hash covers the claimed content by
   recomputing the chain construction (Section 8).

   Key Compromise:  If the gateway's signing key is compromised,
   all receipts signed with that key are suspect.
   Implementations SHOULD support key rotation and publish
   revocation lists.  Historical receipts remain verifiable
   against the key that produced them.

   Prompt Injection:  Source material (e.g., articles, datasets)
   may contain adversarial content designed to influence model
   outputs.  Models receive source material as context, not
   instruction.  The adversarial critique round (Section 4.2) is
   designed to surface inconsistencies introduced through prompt
   injection.

   Freshness:  A KU whose fresh_until date has passed may contain
   outdated information.  Consumers SHOULD check the lifecycle
   state (Section 7) before relying on KU content.

   Source Integrity:  When source documents are available, their
   content_hash (Section 3.4) enables verification that the source
   has not changed since the KU was produced.  A hash mismatch
   indicates the KU may be based on outdated or altered source
   material.  Implementations SHOULD flag KUs with source hash
   mismatches as stale regardless of the fresh_until date.

   Confidence Decay:  KUs about rapidly evolving domains (marked
   with volatility "volatile") should be consumed with appropriate
   scepticism even within their freshness window.  The volatility
   field is a hint, not a guarantee; implementations SHOULD allow
   consumers to override freshness intervals based on their own
   assessment of domain stability.


12.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

   A future revision may request registration of a media type for
   Knowledge Unit artifacts (e.g.,
   "application/vnd.acta.knowledge-unit+json").


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve
              Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8032, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8032>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
              RFC 2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8174, May 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

   [draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts]
              Farley, T., "Signed Receipts for AI Agent Actions",
              Internet-Draft
              draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts-01,
              Work in Progress.

13.2.  Informative References

   [RFC9497]  Davidson, A., Faz-Hernandez, A., Sullivan, N., and
              C. Wood, "Oblivious Pseudorandom Functions (OPRFs)
              Using Prime-Order Groups", RFC 9497,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9497, December 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9497>.


Author's Address

   Tom Farley
   Veritas Acta
   Email: tjf@veritasacta.com
   URI:   https://veritasacta.com
